_your zenodo badge here_

# mcmanamay_etal_2024_erl

**Divergent Urban Land Trajectories Under Alternative Population Projections within the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways**

Ryan A. McManamay<sup>1\*</sup>, Alen Raad<sup>1,2</sup>, Chris R. Vernon<sup>3</sup>, Travis Thurber<sup>3</sup>, Jing Gao<sup>4</sup>, Stephen Powers<sup>2</sup>, Brian O'Neill<sup>3</sup>

<sup>1 </sup> Department of Environmental Science, Baylor University, Waco, TX, USA.
<sup>2 </sup> Department of Biology, Baylor University, Waco, TX, USA.
<sup>3 </sup> Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA.
<sup>4 </sup> Department of Geography and Spatial Science, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.

\* corresponding author:  ryan_mcmanamay@baylor.edu

## Abstract
Population change is a main driver behind global environmental change, including urban land use and land cover (LULC) change. In future scenario modeling, assumptions regarding how populations will change locally, despite identical global constraints of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs), can have dramatic effects on subsequent regional urbanization. Using a spatial modeling experiment at high resolution (1-km), this study compared how two alternative US population projections, varying in the spatially explicit nature of demographic patterns and migration, affect urban land dynamics simulated by the Spatially Explicit, Long-term, Empirical City development (SELECT) model for SSP2, SSP3, and SSP5. The population projections included: 1) newer downscaled state-specific population (SP) projections inclusive of updated international and domestic migration estimates, and 2) prevailing downscaled national-level projections (NP) agnostic to localized demographic processes. Our work shows that alternative population inputs, even those under the same SSP, can lead to dramatic and complex differences in urban land outcomes. Under the SP projection, less urban land expansion is expected in urban areas and more urban land expansion in rural areas than under the NP projection. This suggests that recent demographic information supports more extreme urban extensification in rural areas in the US than previously anticipated. Urban land outcomes to population inputs were spatially variable where areas in close spatial proximity showed divergent patterns, reflective of the spatially complex urbanization processes that can be accommodated in SELECT. Although different population projections and assumptions led to divergent outcomes, urban land development is not a linear product of population change but the result of complex relationships between population, dynamic urbanization processes, stages of urban development maturity, and feedback mechanisms. These findings highlight the importance of accounting for spatial variations in the population projections, but also urbanization process to accurately project long-term urban land patterns.

## Journal reference
McManamay, R.A., Raad, A., Vernon, C.R., Thurber, T., Gao, J., Powers, S., O'Neill, B. (in review). Divergent Urban Land Trajectories Under Alternative Population Projections within the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways, Environmental Research Letters.

## Code reference
References for each minted software release for all code involved.  

These are generated by Zenodo automatically when conducting a release when Zenodo has been linked to your GitHub repository. The Zenodo references are built by setting the author order in order of contribution to the code using the author's GitHub user name.  This citation can, and likely should, be edited without altering the DOI.

If you have modified a codebase that is outside of a formal release, and the modifications are not planned on being merged back into a version, fork the parent repository and add a `.<shortname>` to the version number of the parent and construct your own name.  For example, `v1.2.5.hydro`.

Human, I.M. (2021, April 14). Project/repo:v0.1.0 (Version v0.1.0). Zenodo. http://doi.org/some-doi-number/zenodo.7777777

## Data reference

### Input data

Jones, B., and B. C. O'Neill. 2020. Global One-Eighth Degree Population Base Year and Projection Grids Based on the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways, Revision 01. Palisades, New York: NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC). https://doi.org/10.7927/m30p-j498.

1-km gridded data (Zoraghein and
O’Neill 2020b)

### Output data

McManamay, R., Thurber, T., Vernon, C. R., O'Neill, B. C., & Gao, J. (2022). IM3 SELECT Urbanization Data (v1.0.0) [Data set]. MSD-LIVE Data Repository. https://doi.org/10.57931/1887521

## Contributing modeling software
| Model | Version | Repository Link | DOI |
|-------|---------|-----------------|-----|
| Spatially-Explicit, Long-term, Empirical City developmenT (SELECT) | v1.0.0 | https://github.com/IMMM-SFA/select | https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7083151 |
| R | v4.2.1 | https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/old/4.2.1/ | |

## Reproduce my experiment
Fill in detailed info here or link to other documentation that is a thorough walkthrough of how to use what is in this repository to reproduce your experiment.


1. Install the software components required to conduct the experiement from [Contributing modeling software](#contributing-modeling-software)
2. Download and install the supporting input data required to conduct the experiement from [Input data](#input-data)
3. Run the following scripts in the `workflow` directory to re-create this experiment:

| Script Name | Description | How to Run |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `step_one.py` | Script to run the first part of my experiment | `python3 step_one.py -f /path/to/inputdata/file_one.csv` |
| `step_two.py` | Script to run the last part of my experiment | `python3 step_two.py -o /path/to/my/outputdir` |

4. Download and unzip the output data from my experiment [Output data](#output-data)
5. Run the following scripts in the `workflow` directory to compare my outputs to those from the publication

| Script Name | Description | How to Run |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `compare.py` | Script to compare my outputs to the original | `python3 compare.py --orig /path/to/original/data.csv --new /path/to/new/data.csv` |

## Reproduce my figures
Use the scripts found in the `figures` directory to reproduce the figures used in this publication.

| Script Name | Description | How to Run |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `generate_figures.py` | Script to generate my figures | `python3 generate_figures.py -i /path/to/inputs -o /path/to/outuptdir` |
